the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
all right so now we're gonna move on to
talk about spontaneous change and so
this is today's handout so spontaneous
reaction is a reaction that proceeds in
the forward direction without any kind
of outside intervention like heat being
added for example it just it just goes
in that in that in that direction ok so
so we can talk about reactions following
reactions are spontaneous at constant
pressure and we'll see later that
temperature can make a difference
between whether something spontaneous or
not but constant pressure here's an
example iron plus oxygen and what is
this in layman's term an example of rust
yes and many of you are probably aware
of this rust is a spontaneous process
it's something that people try to do
something about you don't want your car
to rust if you're new to New England and
you're from a part of the country that
doesn't get so cold you may not have you
look at people's cars and you're like
wow look at all that rust all over them
yes rust happens especially in New
England and Delta H here is negative is
this endothermic or exothermic
exothermic minus 824 okay here is
another spontaneous process
this is molecule is ATP and it will
hydrolyze which means react with water
forming ADP so ATP is triphosphate ADP
is diphosphate so one of the phosphates
and here's the odd phosphate comes off
it hydrolyzes off and this is a
spontaneous process we have a hat we
also have a Delta H nought of minus 24
kilojoules per
and remember when we oxidize glucose in
our body we store that energy in ATP and
we want that hep-2 to be around and then
when we break ATP apart it releases the
energy so this is a very important
biological process and you have a
negative value exothermic reaction but
there's a few other examples of
spontaneous reactions one of them is
this one and we've probably all
experienced this if you're from New
England you've seen snow melts you've
seen or ice melt solid to liquid if
you're from a hot part of the world you
probably had ice cubes in your nice
refreshing drink with maybe a little
umbrella on the top anyway you've
everyone I think has seen ice melt but
here Delta H naught is a positive value
it's endothermic also if you have
ammonium nitrate this will just come
apart in a spontaneous reaction Delta H
here is plus 28 kilojoules per mole so
is Delta H the key to spontaneity
it is not plays into it but it is not
the determining factor so if Delta H
naught is not the key to spontaneity
what is it is free energy yes
particularly Gibbs free energy or Delta
G and you know I I'm really happy they
decided to add the Gibbs free energy
because another thing of energy would be
a lot so so having this free energy have
an abbreviation of G I think is a good
thing so Gibbs free energy so Gibbs free
energy depends on Delta H but it also
depends on another term which is T Delta
s temperature and Delta s change in
entropy so Delta G is the predictor of
whether a reaction will
forward in the spontaneous in the
forward direction in a spontaneous
fashion or not so let's just think about
the sine of Delta G and what it means so
again at constant temperature and
pressure here Delta G less than zero
negative Delta G is that spontaneous or
not spontaneous positive Delta G it's
not spontaneous non spontaneous and
Delta G equals zero it's one of the
other things that I am very fond of
which is equilibrium so Delta G
indicates whether something is
spontaneous or not negative value
spontaneous in the forward Direction
positive value not spontaneous in the
forward direction and equilibrium the
thing we all try to reach in our lives
okay so let's look at an example and
calculate what Delta G is going to be so
we saw this off this equation already we
have a positive Delta H nought and now
I'm telling you that Delta s naught is
also a positive value so we can use this
equation and this is really one of the
most important equations in chemistry
figuring out this equation was really a
crowning achievement and you'll be using
it a lot not just in this unit but
pretty much in every unit from now on
you will be using this equation alright
so room temperature pretty much we're
not doing occasion we'll do something
not at room temperature but we like room
temperature so and we like it in Kelvin
so Delta G nought so we plug in our
Delta H value so it's going to equal
Delta H minus the temperature and if the
temperature isn't given in a problem you
can assume that it's 298 and now we need
to plug in Delta s but I left a blank
here to make a point which is that Delta
s is are almost always given in joules
per Kelvin per mole
but everything else is given in
kilojoules so you want to make sure you
convert your units or you're gonna come
up with very funky answers at the end
so from Joules to kilojoules sum now
plus 0.109 kilojoules per Kelvin per
mole and we can do this out now so we
have plus twenty eight minus thirty two
point four eight and why don't you tell
me how many significant figures this
answer has
okay ten more seconds
okay so at least these some people got
it right we've identified once again a
weakness so rules of adding and
subtracting so we have 28 here - 32
there are no significant figures after
the decimal point here so we're just
left with 4 so when we're doing
multiplication or division we consider
the total number of significant figures
but with addition and subtraction you
got to pay attention to where the
decimal point is and we get into the
next unit there are logs and those have
special rules of significant figures yes
very exciting all right so Delta G
naught is negative here although Delta H
is positive so this reaction is
spontaneous it's not hugely it's a
pretty small number but still it's
spontaneous all right so let's consider
our friend over here that we've been
talking about glucose being oxidized to
co2 in water
you practically should have the Delta H
memorized for that at this point now I'm
telling you what the Delta s naught is
and it's positive 2 3 3 joules per
Kelvin per mole and we can plug this
into our equation to calculate a Delta G
naught again remembering to convert
Joules to kilojoules to do this and so
now we see that it is a very has a very
negative Delta G naught here - mm - mm
885 kilojoules per mole at room
temperature so at room temperature this
reaction is spontaneous but slow we saw
that with the the candies that had
glucose in it we open them up and no
water or co2 were obviously being
liberated in
reaction because it is slow and now a
clicker question I want you to tell me
whether it would be spontaneous at
different temperatures or not
okay ten more seconds
yep so it is spontaneous at all
temperatures not all reactions are but
this one is so if we go back here the
reaction spontaneous at all temperatures
and that's because to be spontaneous you
want a Delta G that's negative if Delta
H is negative and Delta s is positive
then you'll have a negative minus a
negative so it doesn't matter what
temperature is this will always yield a
negative Delta G naught so other
reactions that might not be the case but
if you have negative Delta H and a
positive Delta s it will be spontaneous
so negative Delta H again exothermic
heat release and a positive entropy is a
favorable thing entropy is always
increasing so if this reaction has
increase in entropy it'll be much more
likely to be spontaneous all right so
let's talk about entropy so entropy is a
measure of disorder of a system Delta s
is the change in entropy and Delta s
again is a state function so one example
of entropy and new england are these
stone walls that do not look absolutely
beautiful
they're often stones falling everywhere
and it doesn't matter if these these
stone walls were probably built in 1600s
or 1700s in new england were fell
totally apart and we rebuilt now we just
care about how the wall is compared to
the way it started so Delta s again is a
state function it doesn't depend on path
and so if you get out and walk around
and go like on the Minuteman Trail and
see some of the historical sites where
Paul Revere rode his horse along a lot
of stone walls there's a New England
poet who write who writes about this
Robert Frost and he said something there
is that doesn't love a wall and that
something is entropy entropy does not
love a wall entropy does
like order another example those of you
who are learning more about me as a
person know that that I am a fan of dogs
this is my dog Shep Shep does not like
going to the groomers does not like it
and I think that this is because he's
been at my office hours and he knows
that increasing entropy is favorable
decreasing entropy is not and he says
you know really this violates the laws
of thermodynamics what you're doing to
me and you should cease and desist but
anyway he still gets haircuts
alright so entropy again is this measure
of disorder of a system you have a
positive Delta s which is going to be an
increase in disorder and a negative
Delta s is going to be a decrease in
disorder and it a disorder could be you
can be thinking about this as internal
degrees of freedom in your molecule okay
thinking about this as vibrations all
sorts of different things can lead to
lead to to increase or decrease in
entropy but we often think about changes
in entropy depending on if the reaction
is changing in phase so gas molecules
have greater disorder than liquid and
liquid has greater disorder than solids
and so a solid has all its molecules
lined up and liquid can move around a
little bit more but gas really can
spread all out so in terms of entropy
and changes in entropy we can think
about the phase change that's happening
and even predict if something's going to
be an increase in entropy or not so
let's just look at one example so
without a calculation predict the sign
of Delta s and this is a clicker
question
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
and can our demo TAS come down
yep good so you predicted positive which
is the correct answer and so here we're
going from a liquid to a liquid and a
gas and so going to the gas that will
increase the disorder of the system so
Delta has to be positive so now we're
actually going to do a demo of this
particular reaction and so we have
hydrogen peroxide which can just be
bought at a CVS or local drugstore and
it will go to liquid water and also
oxygen gas and so how do you see a gas
and you can see it by putting it in with
soap bubbles so as bubbles of oxygen
form the soap bubbles will bubble out
and so you can see it and you can also
add some kind of food color and we have
yeast as a catalyst to make it go a
little bit faster so let's see if we can
actually see disorder increase
if you want to just say if you want to
talk at the same time here's a mic is on
yes okay great so what we have going on
here is we've got this container it's
filled with water and what I did was I
added about 4 teaspoons of yeast the
yeast as Kathy said is going to act as a
catalyst it's actually um biological
species it's actually gonna living
species is actually gonna catalyze this
reaction what Eric is doing is eric is
pouring some hydrogen peroxide he added
some soap so as you see in the reaction
the h2o 2 is gonna break down into water
and gas the gas being oxygen and what we
don't want to happen is we don't want
just the gas to escape because then you
guys can't see it so what eric is doing
right now is he's adding some soap the
soap is actually going to catch if you
will the escaping gas and turn it into a
foam and what we should be able to see
is the foam kind of escape from this
container you ready okay so hopefully
this will work we should put on our
goggles it smells really bad
okay ready all right and get over there
look at that Hey wow that worked a lot
better than we thought it was gonna work
and so this is sometimes called the
elephant toothpaste demo because that is
sort of what if you were an elephant
what you would probably be brushing your
teeth with I don't know yes so so this
is uh entropy increasing
okay so let's just see if we can quickly
talk about a little more about entropy
and then we'll end so entropy of
reactions can be calculated from
absolute values and again we can use
this this equation here so we have the
Delta s of four of a Delta s for a
particular reaction is this can be
calculated from the Delta s a--'s of the
products minus reactants so again we
have products minus reactants the
absolute value are an absolute Delta s s
equals or s equals zero for a perfect
crystal at a temperature of zero Kelvin
you never really talk about s by itself
it's always really Delta s and s of zero
this is like the saddest thing for a
crystallographer because you know you're
never gonna have a perfect crystal even
if you go to zero Kelvin I feel like at
least experimentally so s equals zero to
me that's kind of sad okay
so if we just put in for this reaction
that we just just did we can put in our
values here and we can put in we're
forming liquid liquid water and we're
forming o to gas and we are using two
molecules of hydrogen peroxide h2o2 here
and so now we can calculate what that
Delta s naught is and it's a value of
125 joules per Kelvin per mole so again
products water and gas minus reactants
pay attention to the stochiometry and
you can get your Delta s value and why
is it positive again we already talked
about this
it's from because it's going from liquid
to a liquid plus a gas and then if we
plug these values in again to see if
it's spontaneous we can use this
equation and plug in our values making
sure we
change our units and we can see that in
fact this is a spontaneous reaction
because it's negative here but you
already knew that because you watched it
go spontaneously so most of the time you
can't do the demo so then you can use
this awesome equation right here okay so
that's where we're stopping for today
and we'll see you all on Friday all
right so if you take out your lecture 16
notes on the bottom of page three we had
an example about the melting of ice at
room temperature so we had did a little
demo for you at the end of class last
time and calculated that the reaction
was spontaneous for hydrogen hydrogen
peroxide is pretty reactive and we
watched the o2 bubbles go and we did
that calculation so we're thinking about
not just Delta H but we're thinking
about Delta s and we're now thinking
about Delta G as well and how they all
play together so when we started last
lecture we had talked about the fact of
some reactions that were spontaneous
where Delta H was negative where it was
exothermic where he was released but
then we also gave some examples where
Delta H was positive and said but these
are also spontaneous reactions we all
know that at room temperature ice will
melt we know that that's a spontaneous
reaction but the Delta H for that
reaction is actually a positive value
it's an endothermic reaction so when
we're thinking about these reactions in
spontaneity we have to be thinking about
Delta G not just Delta H and Delta G has
to do with Delta H and Delta s so
sometimes Delta s is the driving force
behind whether a reaction is going to be
spontaneous whether the Delta G will be
negative or positive Delta s is making
that determination so we can calculate
what a Delta s for a reaction is if we
know the entropy values for the products
and it's the sum of the entropy values
for the products minus the sum for the
reactants so when we are doing
of formation we also had products minus
reactants but we have one exception to
this product minus reactant rules and
that's when we're using what what thing
are we going to do reactants minus
products
animal keys right okay but here we're
products minus reactants so we can plug
those numbers in our product is our
liquid water our reactant is our solid
water or our ice and we can calculate
what the Delta s naught is for this
reaction we can put in our values and we
get a positive value positive
twenty-eight point five nine joules per
Kelvin per mole and Delta s is tend to
be in joules everything else is in
kilojoules so keep that in mind and why
why is why do you think this reaction it
has a positive value why is Delta s
greater than zero what would be your
guess for that
what
so we're going from a solid to a liquid
so we're increasing the internal degrees
of freedom the molecules of water can
move around more in a liquid than they
can in a solid so this is increasing the
disorder of the system increasing manure
increasing entropy here because the
water molecules can move around more
there's more freedom of motion so Delta
s is positive its increasing and then we
can use that to calculate Delta G not
Gibbs free energy we can plug in our
Delta H value minus t room-temperature
times Delta s which we just calculated
making sure that we convert from Joules
to kilojoules and then our units will be
kilojoules per mole and here Delta G
naught is a negative value so it is
spontaneous we all know it's spontaneous
we've observed this happening so even
though Delta H naught is positive it's
an endothermic reaction ice melts at
room temperature because the Delta G is
negative all right so let's talk a
little more about Delta G so let's talk
about free energy of formation and the
last page of this handout so free energy
of formation Delta G sub F and so this
is analogous to Delta H of formation so
the end empal p of formation so again
when you have the little little value
here the standard Gibbs free energy of
formation for the F here and that's the
formation of one mole of a molecule from
its elements in most stable state and in
their standard states so we can have
tables in your book of these values so
your book in the back if you haven't
explored the back of your book is lots
of tables of things including
information about Delta G's and Delta
H's and bond enthalpies and all sorts of
other things redox potentials we haven't
talked about yet
lots of tables so you can look this up
or if you have already say looked up
your Delta H of formation you can use
this handy equation Delta G equals Delta
H minus T Delta s but if we plug in our
Delta H is of formation we can get our
Delta G's of formation so how you're
going to calculate dental Delta G of
formation depends on what information
you're given so let's think a little bit
about what it means for a particular
Delta G's of formation if they're
positive or if they're negative so let's
look at an example and we saw this
before this is the formation of carbon
dioxide from elements in its most stable
state which is graphite carbon and OH -
gas so these are the elements in their
most stable state forming co2 now I'm
telling you that the Delta G naught is
minus three hundred and ninety four
point three six kilojoules per mole and
we can think about why this what this
information tells us that this is a
fairly large negative number so if Delta
Delta G of formation is less than zero
what's going to be true
thermodynamically and this is a clicker
question
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
interesting okay so let's think about
why this is true this might be the
deciding deciding clicker question we'll
see so if it is negative value for Delta
G a negative value for Delta G means
that it's spontaneous in its forward
direction so here the formation from the
elements in their most stable state if
this is spontaneous in the forward
direction it also means that it's non
spontaneous in the reverse direction
that means one co2 forms it's going to
be stable compared to the elements from
which it came because it's non
spontaneous going in the reverse
direction or at least that's the way
that I like to think about it so
relative to its elements its stable
spontaneous forward non spontaneous in
Reverse so this is kind of bad news for
us because there's too much co2 in our
environment right now it's a greenhouse
gas and wouldn't it be awesome if we
could just encourage it all to go back
to its elements for more oxygen which we
could breathe how lovely make some nice
graphite maybe compress it make some
diamonds but no it is quite stable
compared to its elements so co2 is in
our environment causing global warming
and it's going to be hard to solve that
problem not easy to solve that problem
so this is unfortunate news that
thermodynamics gives us alright so then
we can look at the other if you have a
positive value for Delta Delta G of
formation then it's thermodynamically
unstable compared to its elements so
it's spontaneous going in the reverse
direction so it's unstable so
thermodynamics tells us whether
something is stable or unstable and
kinetics tells us about whether things
will react quickly or not so something
can be kinetically inert it might take a
long time to react
but thermodynamics tell
stable unstable so thermodynamics is
great but it doesn't tell us anything
about the rates of reactions so nothing
about the rates and that's kinetics so
really thermodynamics and kinetics are
very important for explaining reactions
and we'll talk about more kinetics at
the end so to calculate a Delta G for a
reaction it depends again what you're
given you can sum up the Delta G of
formation of your products minus your
reactants or you might use this you'll
find yourself using this equation a lot
this again is really was a crowning
achievement of thermodynamics that Delta
G equals Delta H minus T Delta s so
again whatever information you're given
you can use that to find these values
okay so we're not done with this
equation we're going to switch handouts
but we're going to continue with that
exact same equation